src/routes/resources/+page.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Resources
description: A list of resources that have helped me
---

<script>
</script>

Here's a list of resources that I have found useful related to programming (largely related to data analysis, machine learning, and data visualization), and understanding policy.

# Programming

## R

- [swirl](https://swirlstats.com/): How I started learning R! An interactive tutorial in R itself.
- [Modern R with the tidyverse](https://modern-rstats.eu/): A great introduction to R with a focus on the [tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/)
- [Efficient R Programming](https://csgillespie.github.io/efficientR/): Explains efficient programming workflows and setting up your R environment
- [R for Data Science](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/): Probably the most well known resource, I haven't used it too much but it has certainly been a useful reference from time to time
- [Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/): Helpful for understanding how R works which will help you improve your programming skills with it
- [Mastering Shiny](https://mastering-shiny.org/): Learn to develop web applications using R
- [R Packages](https://r-pkgs.org/): Learn how to create R packages

## Statistics/Machine Learning

Statistics and Machine Learning could be its own section, but because a lot of the resources focus on programming too, I'm including it within programming.

- [An Introduction to Statistical Learning](https://www.statlearning.com/)
- [Introduction to Econometrics with R](https://www.econometrics-with-r.org/index.html)
- [Causal Inference The Mixtape](https://mixtape.scunning.com/)

# Data Visualization

## Tools

- [coolors.co](https://coolors.co/): a colour palette generator

## Books

- [The Visual Display of Quantitative Information](https://www.edwardtufte.com/book/the-visual-display-of-quantitative-information/), by Edwarde Tufte
- [Visual Explanations](https://www.edwardtufte.com/book/visual-explanations-images-and-quantities-evidence-and-narrative/), by Edward Tufte
- [W.E.B. Du Bois's Data Portraits: Visualizing Black America](https://papress.com/products/w-e-b-du-boiss-data-portraits-visualizing-black-america), by Britt Rusert and Whitney Battle-Baptiste

# Behavioural Science & Public Policy

## Books

- [Behavioural Insights](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262539401/behavioral-insights/), by Michael Hallsworth and Elspeth Kirkman
- [Democracy Declined](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/D/bo51204873.html), by Mallory E. SoRelle
- [Noise](https://bookshop.org/p/books/noise-a-flaw-in-human-judgment-daniel-kahneman/16321831), by Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony, and Cass Sunstein
- [Nudge](https://bookshop.org/p/books/nudge-the-final-edition-cass-r-sunstein/16977176)
- [Superforecasting](https://bookshop.org/p/books/superforecasting-the-art-and-science-of-prediction-dan-gardner/10857590)
- [Truth Decay](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2314.html)

Commit message:

Add geocomputation resource: Include "Geocomputation with R" as a reference for geospatial programming

src/routes/resources/+page.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Resources
description: A list of resources that have helped me
---

<script>
</script>

Here's a list of resources that I have found useful related to programming (largely related to data analysis, machine learning, and data visualization), and understanding policy.

# Programming

## R

- [swirl](https://swirlstats.com/): How I started learning R! An interactive tutorial in R itself.
- [Modern R with the tidyverse](https://modern-rstats.eu/): A great introduction to R with a focus on the [tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/)
- [Efficient R Programming](https://csgillespie.github.io/efficientR/): Explains efficient programming workflows and setting up your R environment
- [R for Data Science](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/): Probably the most well known resource, I haven't used it too much but it has certainly been a useful reference from time to time
- [Advanced R](https://adv-r.hadley.nz/): Helpful for understanding how R works which will help you improve your programming skills with it
- [Mastering Shiny](https://mastering-shiny.org/): Learn to develop web applications using R
- [R Packages](https://r-pkgs.org/): Learn how to create R packages
- [Geocomputation with R](https://r.geocompx.org/): My go-to reference for anything geospatial

## Statistics/Machine Learning

Statistics and Machine Learning could be its own section, but because a lot of the resources focus on programming too, I'm including it within programming.

- [An Introduction to Statistical Learning](https://www.statlearning.com/)
- [Introduction to Econometrics with R](https://www.econometrics-with-r.org/index.html)
- [Causal Inference The Mixtape](https://mixtape.scunning.com/)

# Data Visualization

## Tools

- [coolors.co](https://coolors.co/): a colour palette generator

## Books

- [The Visual Display of Quantitative Information](https://www.edwardtufte.com/book/the-visual-display-of-quantitative-information/), by Edwarde Tufte
- [Visual Explanations](https://www.edwardtufte.com/book/visual-explanations-images-and-quantities-evidence-and-narrative/), by Edward Tufte
- [W.E.B. Du Bois's Data Portraits: Visualizing Black America](https://papress.com/products/w-e-b-du-boiss-data-portraits-visualizing-black-america), by Britt Rusert and Whitney Battle-Baptiste

# Behavioural Science & Public Policy

## Books

- [Behavioural Insights](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262539401/behavioral-insights/), by Michael Hallsworth and Elspeth Kirkman
- [Democracy Declined](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/D/bo51204873.html), by Mallory E. SoRelle
- [Noise](https://bookshop.org/p/books/noise-a-flaw-in-human-judgment-daniel-kahneman/16321831), by Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony, and Cass Sunstein
- [Nudge](https://bookshop.org/p/books/nudge-the-final-edition-cass-r-sunstein/16977176)
- [Superforecasting](https://bookshop.org/p/books/superforecasting-the-art-and-science-of-prediction-dan-gardner/10857590)
- [Truth Decay](https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2314.html)
